Cervical Cancer Prediction Modelling Analysis
================
Samson Bakos, Morris Chan, Revathy Ponnambalam, Waiel Tinwala (Master of
Data Science, University of British Columbia)

-   <a href="#the-goal" id="toc-the-goal">The Goal</a>
-   <a href="#problem-background" id="toc-problem-background">Problem
    Background</a>
-   <a href="#the-dataset" id="toc-the-dataset">The Dataset</a>
-   <a href="#methods" id="toc-methods">Methods</a>
    -   <a href="#splitting-cleaning-and-eda"
        id="toc-splitting-cleaning-and-eda">Splitting, Cleaning and EDA</a>
    -   <a href="#feature-selection-and-target-transformation"
        id="toc-feature-selection-and-target-transformation">Feature Selection
        and Target Transformation</a>
    -   <a href="#modelling" id="toc-modelling">Modelling</a>
    -   <a href="#packing-and-automation"
        id="toc-packing-and-automation">Packing and Automation</a>
-   <a href="#results" id="toc-results">Results</a>
-   <a href="#conclusion-and-next-steps"
    id="toc-conclusion-and-next-steps">Conclusion and Next Steps</a>
-   <a href="#references" id="toc-references">References</a>

## The Goal

To create a machine learning model that can accurately diagnose or
stratify risk for cervical cancer based on lifestyle factors, sexual
history, and STI comorbidities.

## Problem Background

Cervical Cancer is the second most common cancer in women worldwide, and
disproportionately affects poor regions, particularly in Latin America,
Sub Saharan Africa, and the Indian Subcontinent. (Petignat and Roy
(2007)). It is most often caused by exposure to Human Papillomavirus
(HPV), especially in unvaccincated individuals. (Castellsagué (2008)).
It has been found that early diagnosis can allow for an 80-95% success
rate of surgery or chemotherapy, making early diagnosis extremely
important. (Petignat and Roy (2007)). Because HPV is a sexually
transmitted infection, a significant body of literature exists exploring
statistical links between cervical cancer/HPV and lifestyle, sexual
history, and other STIs. For example, Bosch’s “Risk Factors for Cervical
Cancer in Columbia and Spain” (Bosch et al. (1992)) which found strong
links between hormonal contraceptives and cervical cancer. Because of
limited health services and education in regions where HPV/ Cervical
Cancer are most prevalent, a niche exists for an analytical tool that
can be used to assess risk using only basic questions and medical
history, identifying individuals who are at risk to shortlist them for
further assessment.

## The Dataset

This data is sourced from ‘Transfer Learning with Partial Observability
Applied to Cervical Cancer Screening.’(Fernandes, Cardoso, and Fernandes
(2017)). It was accessed through the UCI Machine Learning Repository,
found here:
<https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Cervical+cancer+%28Risk+Factors%29>.
The data is composed of survey results and medical records for 858
female patients from ‘Hospital Universitario de Caracas’ in Caracas,
Venezuela, alongside the results of four traditional diagnosis tests
(i.e. biopsy).

## Methods

### Splitting, Cleaning and EDA

Data was first split 80/20 into a training and test set. Exploratory
Data Analysis (EDA) was carried out on the train set and can be
replicated use the scripts provided in the usage section. Key EDA
findings include some features having an extremely large number of
missing or null values due to the personal nature of the questions
involved (i.e. number of sexual partners), with many respondents
preferring not to say. There was also a significant prevalence of class
imbalance for many features, including the targets. While this is not
inherently problematic thanks to balancing arguments in the models, the
small size of the data set (n = 858 pre split) means this analysis
relies on a very small number of positive examples, reducing statistical
power. Examples of this class imbalance is shown below, with the bottom
row being the potential targets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<img src="../results/binary_feat.png" alt="Figure 1: EDA for Binary/ Categorical Features" width="50%" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Feature Selection and Target Transformation

Given the large number of missing values and that some variables in the
data set are essentially describing similar biological features, we only
selected a subset of variables. For example, we exclude most of the STD
columns due to their lack of variance, while including
`STD:condylomatosis` as it is an umbrella term in STD pathology.

Target transformation was performed in this project. Originally, the
data set contains 4 target variables: `Hinselmann`, `Schiller`,
`Cytology`, and `Biopsy`. They represent 4 types of diagnostic methods.
We combined them with a union operation into 1 single target variable to
minimize complexity.

### Modelling

Machine Learning models were then applied using Scikit-Learn (Pedregosa
et al. (2011)). The modelling process involved training and testing the
dataset on a variety of models to investigate what algorithms might be
suitable for this problem. Models tested include Decision Trees, kNN,
SVC, Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression, and Random Forests. All models
were initially assessed with default hyperparameters, with kNN and
Decision Trees being eliminated due to poor performance. Remaining
models were optimized via hyperparameter tuning and applied to the test
set.

Models were assessed primarily on the criteria of maximum recall to
minimize Type II Error, with a proposed working threshold of 0.28
precision (twice the sample positive rate), deliberately set quite low
due to the dangers of false negatives in the diagnosis/ risk
identification context.

Test set results are presented in the results section below.

### Packing and Automation

Packaging of this analysis was done using docopt scripts (de Jonge
(2020)).

## Results

Results of this analysis are unfortunately disappointing, as no model
seems to provide sufficient performance to merit deployment as a
diagnosis tool, though there is some limited application as a
non-independent risk flagging system discussed below. Our hope for a
strong model was a recall of 0.8 at a precision of 0.28. This is a high
recall goal, but given the dangers of Type II error (failing to flag at
risk individuals), recall is essential, and is the reason for our
deliberately lower precision.

PR Curves against the validation set are shown below:

<img src="../results/06-pr_curve_logreg.png" alt="Figures 2 and 3: PR Curves, Logistic Regression (Left) and Naive Bayes (Right)" width="50%" /><img src="../results/05-pr_curve_nb.png" alt="Figures 2 and 3: PR Curves, Logistic Regression (Left) and Naive Bayes (Right)" width="50%" />

<img src="../results/04-pr_curve_rfc.png" alt="Figures 4 and 5: PR Curves, Random Forest Classifier (Left) and Support Vector Classifier (Right)" width="50%" /><img src="../results/03-pr_curve_svc.png" alt="Figures 4 and 5: PR Curves, Random Forest Classifier (Left) and Support Vector Classifier (Right)" width="50%" />

We can see from these plots that even the best performing models
(i.e. Naive Bayes), capture less than 50% of true labels (women with a
cervical cancer diagnosis) at only 28% precision. Missing 50% of cancer
cases is not an acceptable margin of error in this context, especially
considering the low precision threshold, where just under three in four
women flagged by our model would be false positives.

Also concerning is the highly steep nature of these plots, indicating
that small changes in the threshold value can cause massive shifts in
scoring. While some level of jaggedness/ steepness in PR curves is
normal, these plots are much steeper than expected. This is likely
caused by the small number of true data points in the validation set
(where capture or non capture of a few points can dramatic change the
scores). A lack of separation in the predicted probabilities of each
class may also be a factor, where many true and false examples are
grouped at similar prediction probabilities, indicating that these
classes may be poorly separable (i.e. cannot be separated by a single
hyperplane for logistic regression), or that their separation is poorly
described by our features.

|           |   RFC_opt |    NB_opt | LinearSVC_opt |
|:----------|----------:|----------:|--------------:|
| precision | 0.3333333 | 0.3939394 |     0.4000000 |
| recall    | 0.1666667 | 0.5416667 |     0.4166667 |
| f1        | 0.2222222 | 0.4561404 |     0.4081633 |
| auc       | 0.5563063 | 0.7032658 |     0.6576577 |

Table 1. Test set scores (Precision, Recall, f1, AUC) for optimized
models

The table above shows numerical results for evaluation on the test set
at the 0.5 `predict_proba` threshold. We do observe slightly better
results on the test set, possibly because the test set is slightly
larger, and so provides smoother results. Naive Bayes remains the
strongest classifier. Further investigation would lead us to
investigating these values at different operating thresholds (such as
our 0.28 chosen operating threshold), but based on the curves above,
threshold manipulation is not enough to produce independently viable
models.

These plots and test results show that these models are not sufficient
to produce accurate diagnoses on their own. This may be due to the
limited sample size, particularly of positive examples, or simply that
the features provided do not sufficiently account for the variance of
the target and a conclusive diagnosis cannot be made based on
adjacent-factor risk data. This second point is almost certainly true,
as the mechanism of cancer development is not simple cause-and-effect
but is inherently stochastic, limiting the effectiveness of any model
applied.

## Conclusion and Next Steps

While the results are disappointing, these models may still have some
application in a flagging system. While this does not replace normal
diagnostic checks, we can logically infer that individuals flagged by
these models are at least more likely to have cervical cancer, and a
positive flag can provide motivation for further testing, especially if
these models were used in parallel and a single individual received
multiple flags.

Further exploration may be meritted to investigate other models that may
more accurately capture the data/target relationship, feature
engineering and transformation, and testing of model decision thresholds
based on the PR curves.

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-bosch1992risk" class="csl-entry">

Bosch, FX, N Munoz, S De Sanjose, I Izarzugaza, M Gili, P Viladiu, MJ
Tormo, et al. 1992. “Risk Factors for Cervical Cancer in Colombia and
Spain.” *International Journal of Cancer* 52 (5): 750–58.

</div>

<div id="ref-castellsague2008natural" class="csl-entry">

Castellsagué, Xavier. 2008. “Natural History and Epidemiology of HPV
Infection and Cervical Cancer.” *Gynecologic Oncology* 110 (3): S4–7.

</div>

<div id="ref-doc" class="csl-entry">

de Jonge, Edwin. 2020. *Docopt: Command-Line Interface Specification
Language*. <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=docopt>.

</div>

<div id="ref-fernandes2017transfer" class="csl-entry">

Fernandes, Kelwin, Jaime S Cardoso, and Jessica Fernandes. 2017.
“Transfer Learning with Partial Observability Applied to Cervical Cancer
Screening.” In *Iberian Conference on Pattern Recognition and Image
Analysis*, 243–50. Springer.

</div>

<div id="ref-scikit-learn" class="csl-entry">

Pedregosa, F., G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O.
Grisel, M. Blondel, et al. 2011. “Scikit-Learn: Machine Learning in
Python.” *Journal of Machine Learning Research* 12: 2825–30.

</div>

<div id="ref-petignat2007diagnosis" class="csl-entry">

Petignat, Patrick, and Michel Roy. 2007. “Diagnosis and Management of
Cervical Cancer.” *Bmj* 335 (7623): 765–68.

</div>

</div>
